[maskedtensor] Adagrad sparse semantics [3/4] (#2052)
pytorch/tutorials: prototype_source/maskedtensor_adagrad.rst

> Efficiency of writing "sparse" semantics for Adagrad

Reviewer: The title here leaves the reader unsure what to expect--is this offering an alternative? What is the alternative if so?

Maybe something clearer can be: 
```suggestion
Efficiently writing "sparse" semantics for Adagrad with MaskedTensor
```

Author: good point!

====================================================

`Issue 1369 <https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/issues/1369>`__ discussed the additional lines of code

> that were introduce while writing "sparse" semantics for Adagrad.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that were introduced while writing "sparse" semantics for Adagrad.
```
nit

But really the code doesn't use sparsity as a compression and optimization technique,

> it wants to use masked semantics. We worked around this by introducing one-off semantics and operators

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand the difference here--is this trying to say "But really, the code would gain better compression wins and optimizations with masked semantics, not sparsity"?

Author: Thanks, it is a bit confusing - it's really trying to say "the code is really using sparsity as a proxy for masked semantics when sparsity is meant to be used as a compression/optimization technique"

> that encode this behavior while forcing users to be aware of storage details such as indices and values.

Reviewer: Similarly, it would be helpful to replace the mentions of "this" and "this behavior" with what they actually are.

In particular we'll point out when sparsity is used as a semantic extension, i.e. unspecified values are not zero
and when it is just used to compress zeros.
We'll also compare and contrast this with equivalent code written using MaskedTensor.

> In the end the code snippets are repeat without additional comments to show the difference in brevity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the end the code snippets are repeated without additional comments to show the difference in brevity.
```
another nit

Set up
------

.. code-block:: python

    import torch

>     from torch.masked.maskedtensor import masked_tensor

Reviewer: When I try to run this in colab, it cannot find torch.masked --> this is because torch.masked has not been released yet right?

Reviewer: This would be cool to actually bring in when you use it. For the setup chunk and the adagrad current impl chunk, maskedtensor is not actually necessary yet. It could be a good idea to be like "now import maskedtensor and see the magical reduction and simplicity!"

    # Some hyperparameters
    eps = 1e-10
    clr = 0.1

    i = torch.tensor([[0, 1, 1], [2, 0, 2]])
    v = torch.tensor([3, 4, 5], dtype=torch.float32)
    grad = torch.sparse_coo_tensor(i, v, [2, 4])

Original sparse implementation
------------------------------

First, let's break down the current implementation of 
`Adagrad (functional) <https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/blob/6c2f235d368b697072699e5ca9485fd97d0b9bcc/torch/optim/_functional.py#L16-L51>`__

> in PyTorch currently:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in PyTorch:
```
nit

.. code-block:: python

>     :linenos:

Reviewer: This may not be your fault, but the line numbers (while nice) are not great:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/31798555/192620211-a587a946-30b0-483a-80dc-f572280f998a.png)

Aesthetically, they are too close to the code, but more importantly, one cannot copy/paste the code without also copying the line numbers, which is pretty annoying.

Author: yeah - converting to a python file so this won't be an issue anymore

    def _make_sparse(grad, grad_indices, values):
        size = grad.size()
        if grad_indices.numel() == 0 or values.numel() == 0:
            return torch.empty_like(grad)
        return torch.sparse_coo_tensor(grad_indices, values, size)

    # We don't support sparse gradients
    param = torch.arange(8).reshape(2, 4).float()
    state_sum = torch.full_like(param, 0.5)  # initial value for state sum

    grad = grad.coalesce()  # the update is non-linear so indices must be unique
    grad_indices = grad._indices()
    grad_values = grad._values()
    # pow(2) has the same semantics for both sparse and dense memory layouts since 0^2 is zero
    state_sum.add_(_make_sparse(grad, grad_indices, grad_values.pow(2)))

    # We take care to make std sparse, even though state_sum clearly is not.
    # This means that we're only applying the gradient to parts of the state_sum

>     # for which it is specified. This even drives the point home a lot more that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # for which it is specified. This further drives home the point that
```

>     # the passed gradient is not sparse, but masked.

Reviewer: Is a pre-requisite of this tutorial knowing what the difference between sparse and masked would be? If not, this definitely requires a bit more explanation. Even the readme of the maskedtensor library https://github.com/pytorch/maskedtensor could be made a lot more effective if it could show a mini example of how a masked tensor is different from a sparse tensor, e.g., with an avg function.

Author: I don't think it's particularly a requirement - the main points don't really require the exact semantics differences between the two IMO, but if you disagree please voice!

    std = state_sum.sparse_mask(grad)

>     # We currently dodge all these concerns using the private method values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # We currently dodge all these concerns using the private method _values.
```
1. what concerns?
2. nit: added a _ to values cuz I misread "private method values" as "private" "method values" and not "private method" "values".

Author: merged with the line above to make this more clear

    std_values = std._values().sqrt_().add_(eps)

    # We currently don't support div for sparse Tensors because zero / zero is
    # not well defined. For a MaskedTensor undefined / undefined is undefined.

>     param.add_(_make_sparse(grad, grad_indices, grad_values / std_values), alpha=-clr)

Reviewer: Here's my current understanding (please correct if wrong): 
- The code currently does NOT have MaskedTensor, so we are forced to do the `grad_values / std_values `OUTSIDE of the sparse semantic _first_, and _then_ convert it to a sparse tensor. 
- If we had MaskedTensor, we wouldn't need to do this! Because MTs would just do handle that for us!

If that is the correct understanding, I'd recommend:
- highlight the pain of needing to convert back and forth/needing an extra _make_sparse call (call it out).
- contrast that with a foreshadow-y message to the future impl "if we only had maskedtensor! *hint hint*. Since maskedtensors can handle divs (und/und=und), we wouldn't need this extra massaging."

Author: Yeah that's correct! Adding more details to make it more obvious :)

Line 24 is where we have a very important divergence.

The addition of eps should technically be applied to all values but instead is only applied to specified values.
Here we're using sparsity as a semantic extension and to enforce a certain pattern of defined and undefined values.

> If parts of the values of the gradient are zero, they are still included if materialized even though they

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If parts of the values of the gradient are zero, they would still be included even though they
```
the if materialized was a bit confusing--does it add an important distinction I may be missing?

Author: I think materialized is somewhat helpful since that's important to sparsity's optimization -- whether the values are materialized in the sparse representation or not. But maybe it's more confusing than helpful?

could be compressed by other sparse storage layouts.

> This is technically quite brittle even though someone could argue that eps is always very small.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is technically quite brittle! That said, someone could argue that eps is always very small, so it might not matter so much in practice.
```

Would recommend splitting this into two sentences to get your point across first + then allow the competing comment later. I wasn't sure how eps being very small counteracted the point, and it'd be cool if you could offer an explanation.

> Moreover, an implementation `add_` for sparsity as a storage layout and compression scheme should cause densification,

Reviewer: I don't understand why it should, but I think that's just cuz I don't have the prior knowledge.

but we force it not to for performance.
For this one-off case it is fine.. until we want to introduce new compression schemes

> such as CSR, BSR, or 2:4 block sparsity. We'll then need to introduce separate Tensor types for each

Reviewer: In general, I think more links can be added here for people who have no idea what these are.

Reviewer: these as in CSR, BSR, 2:4

> and write variations for gradients compressed using different storage formats, which is inconvenient.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and write variations for gradients compressed using different storage formats, which is inconvenient and not quite scalable nor clean.
```
lol i feel like inconvenient is a bit subjective, but this comment in itself is subjective 😅

MaskedTensor sparse implementation
----------------------------------

We've been conflating sparsity as an optimization with sparsity as a semantic extension to PyTorch.

> MaskedTensor proposes to call the semantic extension through sparsity masked. 

Reviewer: Is this sentence to say:
```suggestion
MaskedTensor proposes to disentangle the optimization from the semantic extension, referring to the semantic extension through sparsity as `masked`. 
```

Or is it saying that "sparsity masked" is some sort of methodology?

Author: I think it is written a bit unclearly - sparsity is currently used as an extension to do masked semantics, which is not the right approach. Rewriting!

> Currently we can't have dense semantics with sparse storage or masked semantics with dense storage, while 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently we can't have dense semantics with sparse storage or masked semantics with dense storage.
```
nit: the while feels weird (not offering MT as a contrast, which it should be)

> MaskedTensor fixes that because it separates the storage from the semantics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MaskedTensor enables both these ideas by separating the storage from the semantics.
```

Consider the above example using a masked gradient:

.. code-block:: python

    # Create an entirely new set of parameters to avoid errors
    param2 = torch.arange(8).reshape(2, 4).float()
    state_sum2 = torch.full_like(param, 0.5)  # initial value for state sum

    mask = (grad.to_dense() != 0).to_sparse()
    masked_grad = masked_tensor(grad, mask)

    state_sum2 = state_sum2 + masked_grad.pow(2).get_data()
    std2 = masked_tensor(state_sum2.to_sparse(), mask)

    # We can add support for in-place operations later. Notice how this doesn't
    # need to access any storage internals and is in general a lot shorter
    std2 = std2.sqrt().add(eps)

    param2 = param2.add((masked_grad / std2).data(), alpha=-clr)

> Note that the implementations look quite similar but just shorter. Much of the boilerplate code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the implementations look quite similar but the MaskedTensor implementation is just shorter. Much of the boilerplate code
```

Seeing that _make_sparse is gone confirms my suspicions on line 68, and I do think it'd be helpful to highlight the points earlier so that the reader knows what to expect and has that "aha" moment while reading the new impl.

around `_make_sparse` (and needing to have a separate implementation per layout) is handled
for you with :class:`MaskedTensor`.

At this point, let's print both this version and original version for easier comparison:

        >>> state_sum
        >>> state_sum
        tensor([[ 0.5000,  0.5000,  9.5000,  0.5000],
                [16.5000,  0.5000, 25.5000,  0.5000]])
        >>> state_sum2
        tensor([[ 0.5000,  0.5000,  9.5000,  0.5000],
                [16.5000,  0.5000, 25.5000,  0.5000]])
        >>> std
        tensor(indices=tensor([[0, 1, 1],
                            [2, 0, 2]]),
            values=tensor([3.0822, 4.0620, 5.0498]),
            size=(2, 4), nnz=3, layout=torch.sparse_coo)
        >>> std2
        MaskedTensor(
        [
            [      --,       --,   3.0822,       --],
            [  4.0620,       --,   5.0498,       --]
        ]
        )
        >>> param
        tensor([[0.0000, 1.0000, 1.9027, 3.0000],
                [3.9015, 5.0000, 5.9010, 7.0000]])
        >>> param2
        tensor([[0.0000, 1.0000, 1.9027, 3.0000],
                [3.9015, 5.0000, 5.9010, 7.0000]])

which proves that the two implementations are indeed the same.

> Conclusion: Difference in Code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Conclusion: Simpler Code With MaskedTensor
```

------------------------------

For reference, this is the regular, dense code path without masked gradients or sparsity:

.. code-block:: python

    state_sum.addcmul_(grad, grad, value=1)
    std = state_sum.sqrt().add_(eps)
    param.addcdiv_(grad, std, value=-clr)
 
The vanilla tensor implementation for sparse is:

.. code-block:: python

    grad = grad.coalesce()  # the update is non-linear so indices must be unique
    grad_indices = grad._indices()
    grad_values = grad._values()

    state_sum.add_(_make_sparse(grad, grad_indices, grad_values.pow(2)))   # a different _make_sparse per layout
    std = state_sum.sparse_mask(grad)
    std_values = std._values().sqrt_().add_(eps)
    param.add_(_make_sparse(grad, grad_indices, grad_values / std_values), alpha=-clr)

while :class:`MaskedTensor` minimizes the code to the snippet:

.. code-block:: python

    state_sum2 = state_sum2 + masked_grad.pow(2).data()
    std2 = masked_tensor(state_sum2.to_sparse(), mask)
    std2 = std2.sqrt().add(eps)
    param2 = param2.add((masked_grad / std2).data(), alpha=-clr)

> One major goal of :class:`MaskedTensor` is to enable sparsity semantics and applications, such as this one.

Reviewer 2: Add a Conclusion and a Further Reading section

To learn more about using sparsity, you can find
[this MaskedTensor sparsity tutorial](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/prototype/maskedtensor_sparsity.html).

> Currently, COO and CSR sparse layouts are supported, though there are immediate plans to add more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, COO and CSR sparse layouts are supported, and there are immediate plans to add more.
```
